\input texinfo    @c -*- texinfo -*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename goblins.info
@settitle Spritely Goblins
@documentencoding UTF-8
@documentlanguage en
@syncodeindex pg cp
@syncodeindex cp fn
@c %**end of header

@dircategory The Algorithmic Language Scheme
@direntry
* Goblins: (goblins).   Distributed programming environment and Spritely's core (Guile edition).
@end direntry

@finalout
@titlepage
@title Spritely Goblins
@author Christine Lemmer-Webber (@email{christine@@spritely.institute})
@author The Spritely Institute
@end titlepage

@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top Spritely Goblins

This is the manual for @uref{https://spritely.institute/goblins/,
Spritely Goblins}, a distributed object programming environment.
Spritely Goblins is maintained by
@uref{https://spritely.institute/, Spritely Networked Communities Institute} and is built to
be the core layer for building broader decentralized networking technologies.

Both this manual and Guile Goblins itself are released under Apache
v2.  See @ref{License} for more information.
@end ifnottex

@menu
* What is Goblins?::              What Goblins gives you
* Getting started::               Installing, running, developing
* High level view::               Conceptual overview
* Tutorial::                      Learn to use Goblins
* API::                           Goblins' fundamental API 
* actor-lib::                     A standard library of sorts
* OCapN::                         The Object Capabilities Network
* Persistence::                   Storing and restoring object graphs
* Debugging tools::               Figure out what's going wrong
* Thanks::                        Contributors to this manual
* License::                       Copying, distributing, using this text
* Index::
@end menu

@node What is Goblins?
@chapter What is Goblins?

@uref{https://spritely.institute/goblins/, Goblins} is a distributed object programming environment.
Features:

@itemize
@item
@strong{Quasi-functional object system:} users hold on to references
of objects/actors, but objects/actors are just procedures.  Rather
than directly mutating, objects/actors can specify that they should
``become'' a new version of themselves when they handle the next
invocation.

@item
@strong{Fully distributed, networked, secure p2p communication:} via
OCapN, the Object Capability Network (which features CapTP, the
Capability Transport Protocol), you can communicate with other objects
over a network connection.  Distributed object interactions are safe
because of ocap security guarantees.

@item
@strong{Transactional updates:} changes happen within a transaction.
If an unhandled exception occurs, Goblins can ``roll back'' history
as if the message never happened, avoiding confused state changes
throughout the system.

@item
@strong{Time travel:} you can snapshot old revisions of the system and
interact with them.

@item
@strong{Asynchronous programming with sophisticated promise chaining:}
asynchronous message passing with promises is supported.  Promises
work such that there's no need to wait for promises to resolve before
interacting@dots{} you can communicate with the future that doesn't
even yet exist!  Sent a message to that remote car factory asking for
a new car?  Why wait for the car to be delivered@dots{} you can send
it a drive message at the same time, and both messages can be
delivered across the network in a single hop.

@item
@strong{Communicating event loops:} objects across multiple event
loops (aka ``vats'') can communicate, whether in the same OS process
or across the network.

@item
@strong{Synchronous and asynchronous behavior, integrated but
distinguished:} both synchronous and asynchronous programming is
supported, but only objects in the same ``vat'' (event loop) can
perform synchronous immediate calls.  All objects can perform
asynchronous calls against each other.

@item
@strong{A library, not a language:} Goblins is itself a library that
can be utilized across a wide variety of Guile programs.

@item
@strong{Object capability security:} Goblins itself is built for
object capability (OCap) security, which is to say that you can only
operate on the references you have access to.  Goblins embraces and
builds upon this foundation.  (However, full OCap security will
require utilizing the sandboxing features of Guile; demonstrations of
this coming soon.)
@end itemize


Goblins' design is inspired by the @uref{http://www.erights.org/, E
programming language} and by the observation that
@uref{http://mumble.net/~jar/pubs/secureos/secureos.html, lambda is
already the ultimate security mechanism} (ie, normal argument-passing
in programs, if taken seriously/purely, is already all the security
system needed).

Spritely Networked Communities Institute was created to advance decentralized
networking infrastructure, particularly as it pertains to social networks.
Goblins is the heart of the system, on which other layers are built.
At the time of writing, two key versions of Goblins are supported, the
@uref{https://docs.racket-lang.org/goblins/index.html, Racket version
of Goblins}, and the @uref{https://www.gnu.org/software/guile/, Guile}
version.  This manual is for the Guile edition of Spritely Goblins.

@node Getting started
@chapter Getting started

@menu
* Installing Goblins::
* Setup for hacking on Goblins::
* TEMPORARY Live hacking ``fix''::
@end menu

@node Installing Goblins
@section Installing Goblins

You'll need to install @code{guile-goblins}.  Either use
@uref{https://guix.gnu.org/, Guix} or use your standard GNU/Linux
distro's package for @code{guile-goblins} (if it exists), or even
better yet run Guix as your standard distro.

Otherwise see the @file{HACKING} and @file{README} files with git
checkouts / release tarballs to install.

@node Setup for hacking on Goblins
@section Setup for hacking on Goblins

You're going to want/need:

@itemize
@item
@uref{https://www.gnu.org/software/emacs/, GNU Emacs}
@item
@uref{https://www.nongnu.org/geiser/, Geiser}, for hacking on Guile
@end itemize

Then, at minimum, you'll want to put in your .emacs:

@lisp
(show-paren-mode 1)  ; Match parentheses
@end lisp

However you probably also want some combination of:

@itemize
@item
@uref{https://github.com/Fuco1/smartparens, smartparens} (or @uref{https://www.emacswiki.org/emacs/ParEdit, paredit}, which is much more strict@dots{} use
smartparens if uncertain)
@item
@uref{https://github.com/Fanael/rainbow-delimiters, rainbow-delimiters}
@item
@uref{https://www.emacswiki.org/emacs/HighlightParentheses, highlight-parentheses}
@end itemize

Now you'll have a nice hacking setup!  Be sure to read the Geiser
manual.

@node TEMPORARY Live hacking ``fix''
@section TEMPORARY: Live hacking ``fix''

The traditional way to hack Guile is to use Geiser, both evaluating
from some @code{foo.scm} file/buffer with more ``permanent'' code via,
for example, the @code{C-x C-e} / @code{C-x C-b} / @code{C-x C-k}
commands to evaluate an expression, evaluate a whole buffer, or
compile a buffer's content; and switching back and forth between that
and the (usually called @code{*Geiser Guile REPL*})
experimental-hacking-and-debugging REPL@.

This works with Goblins, but Geiser does some things to temporarily
redirect output/error ports when doing the file/buffer oriented
evaluation. Unfortunately, this results in Goblins vats potentially
breaking due to spawning a separate thread which inherits these
temporarily redirected ports, which are then closed when the
evaluation succeeds.  There is a long-term plan to deal with this, but
in the meanwhile, whenever you start a Guile / Geiser hacking session,
first execute:

@lisp
> (use-modules (goblins))
@end lisp

@dots{} from the @code{*Geiser Guile REPL*}.  Otherwise vats may
mysteriously ``hang''.  This annoyance will be fixed soon!

@node High level view
@chapter A high level view of Goblins

As a starting point, here's a sketch of a network of Goblins objects
wired to communicate with each other:

@example
.----------------------------------.         .----------------------.
|              Peer 1              |         |         Peer 2       |
|              =======             |         |         ======       |
|                                  |         |                      |
| .--------------.  .---------.   .-.       .-.                     |
| |    Vat A     |  |  Vat B  |   |  \______|  \_   .------------.  |
| |  .---.       |  |   .-.   | .-|  /      |  / |  |    Vat C   |  |
| | (Alice)----------->(Bob)----' '-'       '-'  |  |  .---.     |  |
| |  '---'       |  |   '-'   |    |         |   '--->(Carol)    |  |
| |      \       |  '----^----'    |         |      |  '---'     |  |
| |       V      |       |         |         |      |            |  |
| |      .----.  |       |        .-.       .-.     |  .------.  |  |
| |     (Alfred) |       '-------/  |______/  |____---( Carlos ) |  |
| |      '----'  |               \  |      \  |     |  '------'  |  |
| |              |                '-'       '-'     '------------'  |
| '--------------'                 |         |                      |
|                                  |         |                      |
'----------------------------------'         '----------------------'
@end example

In the above diagram, you see:

@itemize
@item
Two peers (@code{Peer 1} and @code{Peer 2}, running
separately from each other, but connected to each other over the
network via OCapN and CapTP@.

@item
@code{Vat A} and @code{Vat B} are event loops which live on
@code{Peer 1}, and @code{Vat C} is an event loop which lives on
@code{Peer 2}.

@item
The individual objects (represented by circles) live in @emph{vats},
aka event loops which contain objects.  @code{Alice} and @code{Alfred}
live in @code{Vat A}, @code{Bob} lives in @code{Vat B}, and
@code{Carol} and @code{Carlos} live in @code{Vat C}.  (While these
objects have human-like names, they're just Goblins objects.)

@item
The arrows between the objects represent references these objects have
to each other.  @code{Alice} has references to both @code{Alfred} and
@code{Bob}.  @code{Bob} has a reference to @code{Carol}.
@code{Carlos} has a reference to @code{Bob}.

@item
Two objects which are in the same vat are considered @emph{near} each
other, and thus can invoke each other synchronously.  Any objects not
in the same vat are considered @emph{far} from each other.  Any
objects can invoke each other by asynchronous message passing,
assuming they have a reference to each other.

@item
Not pictured: each vat has an @emph{actormap}, an underlying
transactional heap used for object communication.  This is what
permits transactionality and time travel.  (Actormaps can also be used
independently of vats for certain categories of applications.)
@end itemize

Another way to think about this is via the following abstraction
nesting dolls:

@lisp
(peer (vat (actormap @{refr: object-behavior@})))
@end lisp

@itemize
@item
@strong{Peers}, which are CapTP capable endpoints on a network, these are
operating system processes, which contain@dots{}
@item
@strong{Vats}, which are communicating event loops, which contain@dots{}
@item
@strong{Actormaps}, transactional heaps, which contain@dots{}
@item
a mapping of @strong{References} to @strong{Object Behavior}.
@end itemize

@menu
* The ``vat model'' of computation::
* Cooperative multitasking within vats::
@end menu

@node The ``vat model'' of computation
@section The ``vat model'' of computation

As said, Goblins follows what is called the @emph{vat model} of
computation.  A @emph{vat} is an event loop that manages a set of
objects which are @emph{near} to each other (and similarly, objects
outside of a vat are @emph{far} from each other).

An event loop is simply a loop which wait on a queue of events, in
the vat's case a queue of messages sent to objects within the vat.
The event loop will process each message within the queue one by one
dispatching the message to the vat.

Objects which are @emph{near} can perform synchronous call-return
invocations in a manner familiar to most sequential programming
languages used by most programmers today.  Aside from being a somewhat
more convenient way to program, sequential invocation is desirable
because of cheap @emph{transactionality}, which will be expanded upon
more later.  Goblins uses the @code{$} operator to perform synchronous
operations.

Both @emph{near} and @emph{far} objects are able to invoke each other
asynchronously using asynchronous message passing (in the same style
as the @emph{classic actor model}).  It does not generally matter
whether or not a @emph{far} object is running within the same OS
process or machine or one somewhere else on the network for most
programming tasks; asynchronous message passing works the same either
way.  Goblins uses the @code{<-} operator to perform asynchronous
operations.

For both programmer convenience and for networked efficiency, Goblins
supports @emph{promise pipelining}: messages can be sent to promises
which have not yet resolved, and will be forwarded to the target once
the promise resolves.  The sender of the message is handed back a
promise to which it can supply callbacks, listening for the promise to
be fulfilled with a value or broken (usually in case of an unexpected
error).

As usual in the vat model of computation, individual message sends to
a vat (event loop) are queued and then handled one @emph{turn} at a
time, akin to the way board game players take turns around a table
(which is indeed the basis for the term @emph{turn}).

The message, addressing a specific object, is passed to the recipient
object's current behavior.  This object may then invoke other
@emph{near} objects (residing within the same vat), which may
themselves invoke other near objects in a synchronous and sequential
call-return style familiar to most users of most contemporary
programming languages.  Any of these invoked objects may also change
their state/behavior (behavior changes appear purely functional in
Goblins; invocations of other actors do not), spawn new objects,
invoke ordinary expressions from the host language, or send
asynchronous messages to other objects (which are only sent if the
@emph{turn} completes successfully).

While the @emph{vat model} of computation is not new (it originates in
the @uref{http://erights.org/, E} programming language and can trace
some of its ideas back to E's predecessor
@uref{http://erights.org/history/joule/, Joule}; and has since
reappeared in systems such as @uref{https://agoric.com/, Agoric's}
@uref{https://github.com/Agoric/agoric-sdk/tree/master/packages/SwingSet,
SwingSet} kernel), Goblins brings some novel contributions to the
table in terms of transactionality and time-travel debugging,
enhancing an already powerful distributed programming paradigm.

@node Cooperative multitasking within vats
@section Cooperative multitasking within vats

An individual vat is not parallel, i.e. only one object within a vat
can be working at any given time, however vats can work with one
another cooperatively to multitask.  This is done by asynchronously
messages to objects on other vats, possibly waiting for their reply
and then continuing work.

In this way it's important to not block a vat (e.g. by calling sleep
or reading/writing to a port, etc.) as that will block the event loop
and prevent the vat doing work.  Instead we should be using Goblins'
promise system in places where we'd block.

Lets take the following example which has two actors @code{^sleeper},
which sleeps for 10 seconds then returns @code{'awake}, and
@code{^hello} which just returns the symbol @code{'hello}. Both actors
are spawned within the same vat, we then use another vat to invoke
both of them at the same time asynchronously:

@lisp
(use-modules (goblins)
             (fibers)
             (fibers conditions))

(define-actor (^sleeper _bcom)
  (lambda ()
    (sleep 10)
    'awake))

(define-actor (^hello _bcom)
  (lambda ()
    'hello))

(define a-vat (spawn-vat))
(define sleeper
  (with-vat a-vat
    (spawn ^sleeper)))
(define hello
  (with-vat a-vat
    (spawn ^hello)))

(define b-vat (spawn-vat))
(with-vat b-vat
  (on (<- sleeper)
      (lambda (response)
        (pk 'sleeper-said response)))
  (on (<- hello)
      (lambda (response)
        (pk 'hello-said response))))

;; Prevent the program from exiting immediately
(wait (make-condition))
@end lisp

When we run this, the first thing we might notice is nothing happens
for 10 seconds, then this is printed:
@example
;;; (sleeper-said awake)

;;; (hello-said hello)
@end example

During those initial 10 seconds, the entire @code{a-vat} is blocked
because of the @code{(sleep 10)} call, this stops other objects like
our @code{^hello} object from doing anything.  Instead, we should rely
on promises.  The following code fixes the blocking issue:

@lisp
(use-modules (goblins)
             (goblins vat)
             (fibers))

(define-actor (^sleeper _bcom)
  (lambda ()
    (define sleep-vow
      (spawn-fibrous-vow (lambda () (sleep 10) #t)))
    (on sleep-vow
        (lambda _
          'awake)
        #:promise? #t)))

(define-actor (^hello _bcom)
  (lambda ()
    'hello))

(define a-vat (spawn-vat))
(define sleeper
  (with-vat a-vat
    (spawn ^sleeper)))
(define hello
  (with-vat a-vat
    (spawn ^hello)))

(define b-vat (spawn-vat))
(with-vat b-vat
  (on (<- sleeper)
      (lambda (response)
        (pk 'sleeper-said response)))
  (on (<- hello)
      (lambda (response)
        (pk 'hello-said response))))
@end lisp

This time we get:
@example
;;; (hello-said hello)

;;; (sleeper-said awake)
@end example

The initial response from @code{^hello} occurs immediately when we run
the code, then 10 seconds later we see @code{^sleeper}'s response.
This is because the vat is not blocked, we're instead using
@code{spawn-fibrous-vow}.  Vats are built on top of the
@url{https://github.com/wingo/fibers,Fibers} concurrency library.
This procedure calls a thunk (a procedure of zero arguments) in a new
fiber. By spawning a new fiber, the vat's event loop fiber is not
suspended when @code{sleep} is called. @code{spawn-fibrous-vow}
returns a promise that will eventually resolve with the value returned
by the thunk.

This sleep example could be made even easier by using Goblins' built
in @code{timeout} procedure provided by @ref{Timers} module.  Other
tasks likely to block (e.g. reading or writing from ports or working
with other blocking resources) could be written with @ref{IO} module,
which wraps the resource in a Goblins actor that ensures the vat is
never blocked.

@node Tutorial
@chapter Tutorial

@menu
* A simple greeter::
* State as updating behavior::
* Methods aren't essential, but they are useful: Methods aren't essential but they are useful.
* Objects which contain objects::
* Asynchronous message passing::
* Transactions make errors survivable::
* Promise pipelining::
@end menu

@node A simple greeter
@section A simple greeter

First, import Goblins:

@lisp
> (use-modules (goblins))
@end lisp

(@strong{NOTE}: See @ref{TEMPORARY Live hacking ``fix''} if you haven't.)

Goblins actors live in special event loops called @emph{vats}.  Make a
vat to play around with and ``enter'' it at the REPL:

@lisp
scheme> (define a-vat (spawn-vat))
scheme> ,enter-vat a-vat
goblins[1]>
@end lisp

Now implement a friend who will greet you:

@lisp
(define (^greeter bcom our-name)   ; constructor (outer procedure)
  (lambda (your-name)              ; behavior    (inner procedure)
    (format #f "Hello ~a, my name is ~a!"
            your-name our-name)))
@end lisp

Give it a try by instantiating an instance of @code{^greeter}
using @code{spawn} and assign her to the variable @code{alice}:

@lisp
> (define alice
    (spawn ^greeter "Alice"))
@end lisp

The first argument to @code{spawn} is the constructor used to
make the Goblins object, in this case @code{^greeter}.  The remaining
arguments will be passed to the constructor, along with an implicit
argument which can be used to change object behavior called
@code{bcom} (pronounced ``become'').  Thus @code{"Alice"} maps to
@code{our-name}.

You can invoke @code{alice} by using @code{$} for a synchronous
call-return operation:

@lisp
goblins[1]> (define alice
              (spawn ^greeter "Alice"))
goblins[1]> ($ alice "Alfred")
; => "Hello Alfred, my name is Alice!"
@end lisp

The first argument to @code{$} is the object to be invoked, and the
remaining arguments are passed to the ``behavior'' of the object.
Thus @code{your-name} in @code{^greeter}'s behavior procedure is bound
to @code{"Alfred"}.  The behavior procedure thus proceeds with
formatting and returning the greeting string.

You can exit the subrepl for @code{a-vat} with @code{,q} (the same way
as if Guile put us in a subrepl to debug an error):

@lisp
goblins[1]> ,q
scheme>
@end lisp

As you have probably inferred, Goblins-specific operations such as
@code{$} and @code{spawn} happen within a context (typically a
@emph{vat}, though there is an even lower-level structure called an
@emph{actormap} which we will see more about later).  However, the
subrepl entered by @code{,enter-vat} is a convenience for hacking.  You
can run also run code within @code{a-vat} like so:

@lisp
scheme> (call-with-vat a-vat (lambda () ($ alice "Arthur")))
; => "Hello Arthur, my name is Alice!"
@end lisp

Very few operations in Goblins spend time operating on vats directly;
typically commands like the above only happen when bootstrapping the
initial set of actors within a vat or when hacking, after which the
actors within the vats do their own thing.

@node State as updating behavior
@section State as updating behavior

Re-enter @code{a-vat}'s subrepl if you haven't:

@lisp
scheme> ,enter-vat a-vat
goblins[1]>
@end lisp

Here is a simple cell which stores a value.  This cell will have two
methods: @code{'get} retrieves the current value, and @code{'set}
replaces the current value with a new value.

@lisp
(define* (^cell bcom #:optional [val #f])
  (case-lambda
    (()         ; get
     val)
    ((new-val)  ; set
     (bcom (^cell bcom new-val)))))
@end lisp

@code{case-lambda} allows for dispatching depending on the number of
arguments, so this code says that if no arguments are provided,
the cell shares the current value; and if one argument is provided,
the cell updates itself to become a cell storing the new value.

Cells hold values. So do treasure chests. Make a treasure chest
flavored cell.  Taking things out and putting them back in is
easy:

@lisp
goblins[1]> (define chest (spawn ^cell "sword"))
goblins[1]> ($ chest)
; => "sword"
goblins[1]> ($ chest "gold")
goblins[1]> ($ chest)
; => "gold"
@end lisp

Now you can see what @code{bcom} is: a capability specific to this
object instance which allows it to change its behavior!  (For this
reason, @code{bcom} is pronounced ``become''!)

@code{bcom} also has an optional second argument which is used when we
wish to return a value. Let's take that cell actor from before. If we
want to return the new value after setting it, we can do that by
specifying the optional second argument to @code{bcom}:


@lisp
(define* (^cell bcom #:optional [val #f])
  (case-lambda
    (()         ; get
     val)
    ((new-val)  ; set
     (bcom (^cell bcom new-val)
           new-val)))) ; Return new-val as the response
@end lisp

Let's do the same invocation as before. This time, when we put a value
in the cell, we also see it returned:

@lisp
goblins[1]> (define chest (spawn ^cell "sword"))
goblins[1]> ($ chest)
; => "sword"
goblins[1]> ($ chest "gold")
; => "gold"
@end lisp

@node Methods aren't essential but they are useful
@section Methods aren't essential, but they are useful

The most common way to select different sub-behaviors isn't by the
number of arguments.  It's much more common to have ``methods'' that
are selected by name.  You can use the @code{methods} macro to do just
that:

@lisp
(use-modules (goblins)
             (goblins actor-lib methods))

(define* (^mcell bcom #:optional [val #f])
  (methods
   ((get)
    val)
   ((set new-val)
    (bcom (^mcell bcom new-val)))))
@end lisp

The use of @code{^mcell} is similar, but now you pass in a first
argument as a symbol selecting the method, and the rest of the
arguments are passed to the object:

@lisp
goblins[1]> (define jar
              (spawn ^mcell "cookies"))
goblins[1]> ($ jar 'get)
; => "cookies"
goblins[1]> ($ jar 'set "crumbs")
goblins[1]> ($ jar 'get)
; => "crumbs"
@end lisp

Methods aren't particularly magical@dots{} the @code{methods} macro
just returns a procedure which is convenient to use for procedure
dispatch:

@lisp
> (define foo-or-bar
    (methods
     ((foo)
      'called-foo)
     ((bar arg)
      (list 'called-bar-with arg))))
> (foo-or-bar 'foo)
; => called-foo
> (foo-or-bar 'bar "meep")
; => (called-bar-with "meep")
@end lisp

So really, @code{methods} just makes a particularly useful kind of
behavior procedure for you, one which takes a first argument for the
method name, grabs the rest of the arguments, and then applies them to
the relevant method.

@node Objects which contain objects
@section Objects which contain objects

Objects can also contain and define other object references, including
in their outer constructor procedure.

Here is the definition of a ``counting greeter'' called
@code{^cgreeter}:

@lisp
(define (^cgreeter _bcom our-name)
  (define times-called
    (spawn ^mcell 0))
  (methods
   ((get-times-called)
    ($ times-called 'get))
   ((greet your-name)
    ;; increase the number of times called
    ($ times-called 'set
       (+ 1 ($ times-called 'get)))
    (format #f "[~a] Hello ~a, my name is ~a!"
            ($ times-called 'get)
            your-name our-name))))
@end lisp

As you can see near the top, @code{times-called} is instantiated as an
@code{^mcell} like the one we defined earlier.  The current value of
this cell is returned by @code{get-times-called} and is updated every
time the @code{greet} method is called:

@lisp
goblins[1]> (define julius
              (spawn ^cgreeter "Julius"))
goblins[1]> ($ julius 'get-times-called)
; => 0
goblins[1]> ($ julius 'greet "Gaius")
; => "[1] Hello Gaius, my name is Julius!"
goblins[1]> ($ julius 'greet "Brutus")
; => "[2] Hello Brutus, my name is Julius!"
goblins[1]> ($ julius 'get-times-called)
; => 2
@end lisp

@node Asynchronous message passing
@section Asynchronous message passing

You have seen that the behavior of objects may be invoked
synchronously with @code{$}.  However, this only works if two objects
are both defined on the same peer and the same event loop (vat) within that
peer.

Now, recall your friend @code{alice} who you defined on vat A@.  The
following works just fine if you're still executing within
@code{a-vat}'s subrepl context:

@lisp
goblins[1]> ($ alice "Alfred")
=> "Hello Alfred, my name is Alice!"
@end lisp

Exit the @code{a-vat} subrepl and make @code{b-vat} and
enter that:

@lisp
goblins[1]> ,q
scheme> (define b-vat
          (spawn-vat))
scheme> ,enter-vat b-vat
goblins[1]>
@end lisp

Since Alice works on A, you cannot synchronously invoke her with
@code{$} on vat B:

@lisp
goblins[1]> ($ alice "Bob")
;; === Caught error: ===
;;  message: #<<message> to: #<local-object> resolve-me: #f args: ()>
;;  exception: ... "Not in the same vat:" #<local-object ^greeter>) ...
@end lisp

This is where @code{<-} comes in.  In contrast to @code{$}, @code{<-}
can be used against objects which live anywhere, even on peers on remote
machines across a network.  However, unlike invocation with @code{$}, you
do not get back an immediate result; you get a promise:

@lisp
goblins[1]> (<- alice "Bob")
; => #<local-promise>
@end lisp

This promise must be listened to.  The procedure to listen to promises
in Goblins is called @code{on}:

@lisp
goblins[1]> (on (<- alice "Bob")
                (lambda (got-back)
                  (format #t "Heard back: ~a\n"
                          got-back)))
; Prints out, at some point in the future:
;   "Heard back: [3] Hello Bob, my name is Alice!"
@end lisp

Not all communication goes as planned, especially in a distributed
system.  Consider an object which breaks in the middle of execution,
such as an instance of @code{^broken} here:

@lisp
(define (^broken _bcom)
  (lambda ()
    (error "Yikes, I broke!")))
@end lisp

@code{on} also supports the keyword arguments of @code{#:catch} and
@code{#:finally}, which both accept a procedure defining handling
errors in the former case, and code which will run regardless of
successful resolution or failure in the latter case:

@lisp
goblins[1]> (define broken-ben
              (spawn ^broken))
goblins[1]> (on (<- broken-ben)
                (lambda (what-did-ben-say)
                  (format #t "Ben says: ~a\n" what-did-ben-say))
                #:catch
                (lambda (err)
                  (format #t "Got an error: ~a\n" err))
                #:finally
                (lambda ()
                  (display "Whew, it's over!\n")))
@end lisp

@node Transactions make errors survivable
@section Transactions make errors survivable

Mistakes happen, and when they do, the damage should be minimal.
But with many moving parts, accomplishing this can be difficult.

However, Goblins makes life easier.  To see how, intentionally insert
a couple of print debugging lines (with @code{pk}, which is pronounced
and means ``peek'') and then an error:

@lisp
(define (^borked-cgreeter _bcom our-name)
  (define times-called
    (spawn ^mcell 0))
  (methods
    ((get-times-called)
     ($ times-called 'get))
    ((greet your-name)
     (pk 'before-incr ($ times-called 'get))
     ;; increase the number of times called
     ($ times-called 'set
        (+ 1 ($ times-called 'get)))
     (pk 'after-incr ($ times-called 'get))
     (error "Yikes")
     (format #f "[~a] Hello ~a, my name is ~a!"
             ($ times-called 'get)
             your-name our-name))))
@end lisp

Now spawn this friend and invoke it:

@lisp
goblins[1]> (define horatio
              (spawn ^borked-cgreeter "Horatio"))
goblins[1]> ($ horatio 'get-times-called)
; => 0
goblins[1]> ($ horatio 'greet "Hamlet")
; pk debug: (before-incr 0)
; pk debug: (after-incr 1)
; ice-9/boot-9.scm:1685:16: In procedure raise-exception:
;   Yikes
; Entering a new prompt.  Type `,bt' for a backtrace or `,q' to continue.
@end lisp

Whoops!  Looks like something went wrong!  You can see from the
@code{pk} debugging that the @code{times-called} cell should be
incremented to 1.  And yet@dots{}

@lisp
goblins[1]> ($ horatio 'get-times-called)
; => 0
@end lisp

Transactionality is covered in greater detail later, but the core idea
here is that synchronous operations run with @code{$} are all done
together as one transaction.  If an unhandled error occurs, any state
changes resulting from synchronous operations within that transaction
will simply not be committed.  This is useful because it means most
otherwise-difficult cleanup steps are handled automatically.

@node Promise pipelining
@section Promise pipelining

@quotation
``Machines grow faster and memories grow larger.  But the speed of
light is constant and New York is not getting any closer to Tokyo.''

--- Mark S@. Miller,
    @uref{http://www.erights.org/talks/thesis/, Robust Composition: Towards a Unified Approach to Access Control and Concurrency Control}

@end quotation

@cindex promise pipelining
@dfn{Promise pipelining} provides two different features at once:

@itemize
@item
A convenient developer interface for describing a series of
asynchronous actions, allowing for invoking the objects which promises
will point to before they are even resolved (sometimes before the
objects even exist!)
@item
A network abstraction that eliminates many round trips
@end itemize

Consider the following car factory, which makes cars carrying the
company name of the factory:

@lisp
;; Create a "car factory", which makes cars branded with
;; company-name.
(define (^car-factory bcom company-name)
  ;; The constructor for cars we will create.
  (define (^car bcom model color)
    (methods                      ; methods for the ^car
     ((drive)                    ; drive the car
      (format #f "*Vroom vroom!*  You drive your ~a ~a ~a!"
              color company-name model))))
  ;; methods for the ^car-factory instance
  (methods                        ; methods for the ^car-factory
   ((make-car model color)       ; create a car
    (spawn ^car model color))))
@end lisp

Here is an instance of this car factory, called @code{fork-motors} and
spawned in @code{a-vat}:

@lisp
scheme> ,enter-vat a-vat
goblins[1]> (define fork-motors
              (spawn ^car-factory "Fork"))
@end lisp

Since asynchronous message passing with @code{<-} works across
peers, it does not matter whether interactions with
@code{fork-motors} are local or via objects communicating over the
network.  This example treat @code{fork-motors} as living on peer A,
and so the following interactions will happen with invocations
originating from peer B@.

Now send a message to @code{fork-motors} invoking the
@code{'make-car} method, receiving back a promise for the car which
will be made, which will be name @code{car-vow} (@code{-vow} being the
conventional suffix given for promises in Goblins):

@lisp
goblins[1]> ,q
scheme> ,enter-vat b-vat
;; Interaction on peer B, communicating with fork-motors on A
goblins[1]> (define car-vow
              (<- fork-motors 'make-car "Explorist" "blue"))
@end lisp

So you have a @emph{promise} to a future car reference, but not the
reference itself.  You would like to drive the car as soon as it rolls
off the lot of the factory, which of course involves sending a message
to the car.

Without promise pipelining, making use of the tools already shown (and
following the pattern most other distributed programming systems use),
you would end up with something like:

@lisp
;; Interaction on peer B, communicating with A
goblins[1]> (on car-vow                    ; B->A: first resolve the car-vow
                (lambda (our-car)          ; A->B: car-vow resolved as our-car
                  (on (<- our-car 'drive)  ; B->A: now we can message our-car
                      (lambda (val)        ; A->B: result of that message
                        (format #f "Heard: ~a\n" val)))))
@end lisp

With promise pipelining, you can simply message the promise of the car
directly.  The first benefit can be observed from code compactness, in
that you do not need to do an @code{on} of @code{car-vow} to later
message @code{our-car}; you can simply message @code{car-vow} directly:

@lisp
;; Interaction on peer B, communicating with A
goblins[1]> (on (<- car-vow 'drive)       ; B->A: send message to future car
                (lambda (val)             ; A->B: result of that message
                  (format #t "Heard: ~a\n" val)))
@end lisp

While clearly a considerable programming convenience, the other
advantage of promise pipelining is a reduction of round-trips, whether
between event-loop @emph{vats} or across peers on the network.

This can be understood by looking at the comments to the right of the
two above code interactions.  The message flow in the first case looks
like:

@example
B => A => B => A => B
@end example

The message flow in the second case looks like:

@example
B => A => B
@end example


In other words, peer B can say to peer A: ``Make me a car, and
as soon as that car is ready, I want to drive it!''

With this in mind, the promise behind Mark Miller's quote at the
beginning of this section is clear.@footnote{Like so many examples in
this document, the designs of promise pipelining and the explanation
of its value come from the E programming language, the many
contributors to its design, and Mark S@. Miller's extraordinary work
documenting that work and its history.  If you find this section
interesting, see both the
@uref{http://www.erights.org/elib/distrib/pipeline.html, Promise
Pipelining} page from @uref{http://erights.org, erights.org} and
sections 2.5 and 16.2 of
@uref{http://www.erights.org/talks/thesis/markm-thesis.pdf, Mark
Miller's dissertation}.}  If two objects are on opposite ends of the
planet, round trips are unavoidably expensive.  Promise pipelining
both allows programmers to make plans and allows Goblins to optimize
carrying out those steps as bulk operations over the network.

@node API
@chapter API

@include api-reference.texi

@node actor-lib
@chapter actor-lib: A standard library of sorts

@include actor-lib-reference.texi

@node OCapN
@chapter OCapN: The Object Capabilities Network

@include ocapn.texi

@node Persistence
@chapter Persistence

@include persistence.texi

@node Debugging tools
@chapter Debugging tools

@include debugger.texi

@node Thanks
@chapter Thanks

The bulk of the original structure and content of this manual came
from Christine Lemmer-Webber.  Juliana Sims reworked a substantial
portion of the manual and heroically documented the entire API and
actor-lib sections.  David Thompson contributed the debugging tools
section and its lovely tutorial.  Additional text and corrections by
Jessica Tallon, Vivianne Langdon, Alan Zimmerman, and Geoffrey
J. Teale.

Many of the ideas are borrowed from
@uref{http://www.erights.org/talks/thesis/markm-thesis.pdf, Mark
Miller's dissertation}, which is an excellent, if nerdy, read.

Jessica Tallon, Jonathan A@. Rees, Randy Farmer, David Thompson,
and Juliana Sims provided review and feedback.

@node License
@chapter License

@emph{(C) 2019-2024 Christine Lemmer-Webber, David Thompson, Jessica
Tallon, Juliana Sims, the Spritely Institute, and other contributors.
See @file{AUTHORS} for details.}

@emph{Both Spritely Goblins and this manual are released under the
terms of the following license:}

@include apache-2.0.texi

@node Index
@unnumbered Index

@printindex fn

@bye
